This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.
“Mendicants, live by the ethical precepts and the monastic code. Live restrained in the monastic code, [[conduct]]ing yourselves well and seeking alms in suitable places. Seeing danger in the slightest fault, keep the rules you’ve undertaken.
When you’ve done this, what more is there to do?
Suppose a [[mendicant]] has got rid of [[desire]] and ill will while walking, and has given up dullness and drowsiness, restlessness and remorse, and doubt. Their energy is roused up and unflagging, their mindfulness is established and lucid, their [[body]] is tranquil and undisturbed, and their mind is immersed in [[immersion]].
Such a [[mendicant]] is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and determined’ when walking.
Suppose a [[mendicant]] has got rid of [[desire]] and ill will while standing …
sitting …
or when lying down while awake.
Such a [[mendicant]] is said to be ‘keen and prudent, always energetic and determined’ when lying down while awake.”
The Buddha spoke this matter.
On this it is said:
“Carefully walking, carefully standing,
carefully sitting, carefully lying;
a [[mendicant]] carefully bends their limbs,
and carefully extends them.
Above, below, all round,
as far as the earth extends;
they scrutinize the rise and fall
of phenomena such as the [[aggregates]].
Meditating [[diligence]]ly like this,
peaceful and stable,
training in what leads to serenity of heart,
always staying mindful;
they call such a [[mendicant]]
‘always determined’.”
This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
