This was said by the Buddha, the Perfected One: that is what I heard.
“Suppose a person was being carried along by a river current that seemed nice and pleasant.
If a person with clear eyes saw them, they’d say:
‘Mister, even though the river current carrying you along seems nice and pleasant, downstream there is a lake with waves and whirlpools, saltwater crocodiles and monsters. When you reach there it will result in [[death]] or deadly pain.’
Then, when they heard what was said, they’d paddle against the stream using their hands and feet.
I’ve made up this simile to make a point.
And this is the point.
‘Stream’ is a term for [[craving]].
‘Seeming nice and pleasant’ is a term for the six interior sense fields.
‘A downstream lake’ is a term for the five lower fetters.
‘Danger of waves’ is a term for [[anger]] and distress.
‘Whirlpool’ is a term for the five kinds of sensual stimulation.
‘Saltwater crocodiles and monsters’ is a term for females.
‘Against the stream’ is a term for renunciation.
‘Paddling with hands and feet’ is a term for being energetic.
‘A person with clear eyes’ is a term for the Realized One, the [[perfected one]], the fully awakened Buddha.”
The Buddha spoke this matter.
On this it is said:
“In pain they’d give up sensual pleasures,
aspiring to the future sanctuary from the yoke.
With deep understanding and heart well-freed,
they’d experience universal liberation.
That knowledge master <j>who has completed the spiritual journey,
and gone to the end of the world, <j>is called ‘one who has gone beyond’.”
This too is a matter that was spoken by the Blessed One: that is what I heard.
