Near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove.
There the Buddha said to the [[mendicant]]s:
“Mendicants, in a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he was a brahmanical student named Magha. That’s why he’s called Maghavā.
In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts in stronghold after stronghold. That’s why he’s called Purindada, the Stronghold-Giver.
In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave gifts carefully. That’s why he’s called Sakka, the Careful.
In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he gave the gift of a guest house. That’s why he’s called Vāsava, the Houser.
Sakka thinks of a thousand things in a moment. That’s why he’s called Sahassakkha, the Thousand-Eye.
Sakka’s wife is the demon maiden named Sujā. That’s why he’s called Sujampati, Sujā’s Husband.
Sakka rules as sovereign lord over the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three. That’s why he’s called lord of [[gods]].
In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.
What seven?
As long as I live, may I support my parents.
As long as I live, may I honor the elders in the family.
As long as I live, may I speak gently.
As long as I live, may I not speak divisively.
As long as I live, may I live at home rid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, loving to let go, committed to charity, loving to give and to share.
As long as I live, may I speak the truth.
As long as I live, may I be free of [[anger]], or should [[anger]] arise, may I quickly get rid of it.
In a former life, when Sakka was a human being, he undertook seven vows. And it was because of undertaking these that he achieved the status of Sakka.
A person who respects their parents,
and honors the elders in the family,
whose speech is gentle and courteous,
and has given up divisiveness;
who’s committed to getting rid of stinginess,
is truthful, and has mastered [[anger]]:
the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three
call them truly a good person.”
