At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, when a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:
‘I’ve finished with [[rebirth]] in hell, the [[animal realm]], and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’
What are the five dangers and threats they have quelled?
Killing living creatures …
stealing …
sexual mis[[conduct]] …
lying …
taking alcoholic drinks that cause negligence …
These are the five dangers and threats they have quelled.
What are the four factors of stream-entry that they have?
It’s when a noble disciple has experiential [[confidence]] in the Buddha …
the teaching …
the Saṅgha …
and their ethical [[conduct]] is loved by the noble ones.
These are the four factors of stream-entry that they have.
And what is the noble system that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom?
A noble disciple carefully and rationally applies the mind to [[dependent origination]] itself …
This is the noble system that they have clearly seen and comprehended with wisdom.
When a noble disciple has quelled five dangers and threats, has the four factors of stream-entry, and has clearly seen and comprehended the noble system with wisdom, they may, if they wish, declare of themselves:
‘I’ve finished with [[rebirth]] in hell, the [[animal realm]], and the ghost realm. I’ve finished with all places of loss, bad places, the underworld. I am a stream-enterer! I’m not liable to be reborn in the underworld, and am bound for awakening.’”
