At Sāvatthī.
“There are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your [[craving]] grows.
Craving is a condition for grasping.
Grasping is a condition for continued existence.
Continued existence is a condition for [[rebirth]].
Rebirth is a condition for [[old age]] and [[death]], sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress to come to be.
That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.
Suppose a bonfire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood.
And from time to time someone would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood.
Fueled and sustained by that, the bonfire would burn for a long time.
In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the gratification provided by these things, your [[craving]] grows.
Craving is a condition for grasping. …
That is how this entire mass of suffering originates.
There are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your [[craving]] ceases.
When [[craving]] ceases, grasping ceases.
When grasping ceases, continued existence ceases.
When continued existence ceases, [[rebirth]] ceases.
When [[rebirth]] ceases, [[old age]] and [[death]], sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress cease.
That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.
Suppose a bonfire was burning with ten, twenty, thirty, or forty loads of wood.
And no-one would toss in dry grass, cow dung, or wood from time to time.
As the original fuel is used up and no more is added, the bonfire would be extinguished due to lack of fuel.
In the same way, there are things that are prone to being grasped. When you concentrate on the drawbacks of these things, your [[craving]] ceases.
When [[craving]] ceases, grasping ceases. …
That is how this entire mass of suffering ceases.”
