At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, I will teach forty-four grounds for knowledge.
Listen and apply your mind well, I will speak.”
“Yes, sir,” they replied.
The Buddha said this:
“And what are the forty-four grounds for knowledge?
Knowledge of [[old age]] and [[death]], knowledge of the origin of [[old age]] and [[death]], knowledge of the [[cessation]] of [[old age]] and [[death]], and knowledge of the practice that leads to the [[cessation]] of [[old age]] and [[death]].
Knowledge of [[rebirth]] …
Knowledge of continued existence …
Knowledge of grasping …
Knowledge of [[craving]] …
Knowledge of feeling …
Knowledge of [[contact]] …
Knowledge of the six sense fields …
Knowledge of name and form …
Knowledge of [[consciousness]] …
Knowledge of choices, knowledge of the origin of choices, knowledge of the [[cessation]] of choices, and knowledge of the practice that leads to the [[cessation]] of choices.
These are called the forty-four grounds for knowledge.
And what is [[old age]] and [[death]]?
The [[old age]], decrepitude, broken teeth, grey hair, wrinkly skin, diminished vitality, and failing faculties of the various [[sentient being]]s in the various orders of [[sentient being]]s.
This is called [[old age]].
The passing away, perishing, disintegration, demise, mortality, [[death]], decease, breaking up of the [[aggregates]], and laying to rest of the corpse of the various [[sentient being]]s in the various orders of [[sentient being]]s.
This is called [[death]].
Such is [[old age]], and such is [[death]].
This is called [[old age]] and [[death]].
Rebirth is the origin of [[old age]] and [[death]].
When [[rebirth]] ceases, [[old age]] and [[death]] cease.
The practice that leads to the [[cessation]] of [[old age]] and [[death]] is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right [[immersion]].
A noble disciple understands [[old age]] and [[death]], their origin, their [[cessation]], and the practice that leads to their [[cessation]]. This is their knowledge of the present phenomenon.
With this present phenomenon that is seen, known, immediate, attained, and fathomed, they infer to the past and future.
Whatever ascetics and [[brahmin]]s in the past directly knew [[old age]] and [[death]], their origin, their [[cessation]], and the practice that leads to their [[cessation]], all of them directly knew these things in exactly the same way that I do now.
Whatever ascetics and [[brahmin]]s in the future will directly know [[old age]] and [[death]], their origin, their [[cessation]], and the practice that leads to their [[cessation]], all of them will directly know these things in exactly the same way that I do now.
This is their inferential knowledge.
A noble disciple has purified and cleansed these two knowledges—
knowledge of the present phenomena, and inferential knowledge.
When a noble disciple has done this, they’re called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a [[trainee]]’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and ‘one who stands pushing open the door of the [[deathless]]’.
And what is [[rebirth]]? …
And what is continued existence? …
And what is grasping? …
And what is [[craving]]? …
And what is feeling? …
And what is [[contact]]? …
And what are the six sense fields? …
And what are name and form? …
And what is [[consciousness]]? …
And what are choices?
There are three kinds of choices.
Choices by way of [[body]], speech, and mind.
These are called choices.
Ignorance is the origin of choices.
When ignorance ceases, choices cease.
The practice that leads to the [[cessation]] of choices is simply this noble eightfold path, that is:
right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right [[immersion]].
A noble disciple understands choices, their origin, their [[cessation]], and the practice that leads to their [[cessation]]. This is their knowledge of the present phenomenon.
With this present phenomenon that is seen, known, immediate, attained, and fathomed, they infer to the past and future.
Whatever ascetics and [[brahmin]]s in the past directly knew choices, their origin, their [[cessation]], and the practice that leads to their [[cessation]], all of them directly knew these things in exactly the same way that I do now.
Whatever ascetics and [[brahmin]]s in the future will directly know choices, their origin, their [[cessation]], and the practice that leads to their [[cessation]], all of them will directly know these things in exactly the same way that I do now.
This is their inferential knowledge.
A noble disciple has purified and cleansed these two knowledges—
knowledge of the present phenomena, and inferential knowledge.
When a noble disciple has done this, they’re called ‘one accomplished in view’, ‘one accomplished in vision’, ‘one who has come to the true teaching’, ‘one who sees this true teaching’, ‘one endowed with a [[trainee]]’s knowledge’, ‘one who has entered the stream of the teaching’, ‘a noble one with penetrative wisdom’, and ‘one who stands pushing open the door of the [[deathless]]’.”
