At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, on the Vulture’s Peak Mountain.
Now at that time Venerable Sāriputta was walking together with several [[mendicant]]s not far from the Buddha.
Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was doing likewise, as were
Venerable Mahākassapa,
Venerable Anuruddha,
Venerable Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī,
Venerable Upāli,
Venerable Ānanda,
and Devadatta.
Then the Buddha said to the [[mendicant]]s,
“Mendicants, do you see Sāriputta walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s have great wisdom.
Do you see Moggallāna walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s have great psychic power.
Do you see Kassapa walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s advocate austerities.
Do you see Anuruddha walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s have clairvoyance.
Do you see Puṇṇa son of Mantāṇī walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s are Dhamma speakers.
Do you see Upāli walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s are experts in monastic law.
Do you see Ānanda walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s are very learned.
Do you see Devadatta walking together with several [[mendicant]]s?”
“Yes, sir.”
“All of those [[mendicant]]s have corrupt wishes.
Sentient beings come together and converge because of an element.
Those who have bad convictions come together and converge with those who have bad convictions.
Those who have good convictions come together and converge with those who have good convictions.
In the past,
in the future,
and also in the present, [[sentient being]]s come together and converge because of an element.
Those who have bad convictions come together and converge with those who have bad convictions.
Those who have good convictions come together and converge with those who have good convictions.”
