At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, [[diversity]] of elements gives rise to [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s. Diversity of [[contact]]s gives rise to [[diversity]] of feelings. Diversity of feelings doesn’t give rise to [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s. Diversity of [[contact]]s doesn’t give rise to [[diversity]] of elements.
And what is the [[diversity]] of elements?
The eye element, ear element, nose element, tongue element, [[body]] element, and mind element.
This is called the [[diversity]] of elements.
And how does [[diversity]] of elements give rise to [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s, and [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s give rise to [[diversity]] of feelings, while [[diversity]] of feelings doesn’t give rise to [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s, and [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s doesn’t give rise to [[diversity]] of elements?
The eye element gives rise to eye [[contact]]. Eye [[contact]] gives rise to feeling born of eye [[contact]]. Feeling born of eye [[contact]] doesn’t give rise to eye [[contact]]. Eye [[contact]] doesn’t give rise to the eye element. …
The mind element gives rise to mind [[contact]]. Mind [[contact]] gives rise to feeling born of mind [[contact]]. Feeling born of mind [[contact]] doesn’t give rise to mind [[contact]]. Mind [[contact]] doesn’t give rise to the mind element.
That’s how [[diversity]] of elements gives rise to [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s, and [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s gives rise to [[diversity]] of feelings, while [[diversity]] of feelings doesn’t give rise to [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s, and [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s doesn’t give rise to [[diversity]] of elements.”
