Near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove.
Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:
“Kassapa, advise the [[mendicant]]s!
Give them a Dhamma talk!
Either you or I should advise the [[mendicant]]s
and give them a Dhamma talk.”
“Sir, the [[mendicant]]s these days are hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They’re impatient, and don’t take instruction respectfully.
Take the [[monk]] called Bhaṇḍa, Ānanda’s pupil. He’s been competing in studies with the [[monk]] called Abhiñjika, Anuruddha’s pupil. They say:
‘Come on, [[monk]], who can recite more? Who can recite better? Who can recite longer?’”
So the Buddha addressed a certain [[monk]],
“Please, [[monk]], in my name tell the [[monk]] called Bhaṇḍa, Ānanda’s pupil, and the [[monk]] called Abhiñjika, Anuruddha’s pupil that
the teacher summons them.”
“Yes, sir,” that [[monk]] replied. He went to those [[monk]]s and said,
“Venerables, the teacher summons you.”
“Yes, reverend,” those [[monk]]s replied. They went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to them:
“Is it really true, [[monk]]s, that you’ve been competing in studies, saying:
‘Come on, [[monk]], who can recite more? Who can recite better? Who can recite longer?’”
“Yes, sir.”
“Have you ever known me to teach the Dhamma like this:
‘Please [[mendicant]]s, compete in studies to
see who can recite more and better and longer’?”
“No, sir.”
“If you’ve never known me to teach the Dhamma like this, then what exactly do you know and see, you foolish men, that after going forth in such a well explained teaching and training you’d compete in studies to
see who can recite more and better and longer?”
Then those [[monk]]s bowed with their heads at the Buddha’s feet and said,
“We have made a mistake, sir. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of us in that after going forth in such a well explained teaching and training we competed in studies to
see who can recite more and better and longer.
Please, sir, accept our mistake for what it is, so we will restrain ourselves in future.”
“Indeed, [[monk]]s, you made a mistake. It was foolish, stupid, and unskillful of you to act in that way.
But since you have re[[cognize]]d your mistake for what it is, and have dealt with it properly, I accept it.
For it is growth in the training of the Noble One to re[[cognize]] a mistake for what it is, deal with it properly, and commit to restraint in the future.”
