So I have heard.
At one time the Buddha was staying near Vesālī, at the Great Wood, in the hall with the peaked roof.
Then Mahāli the Licchavi went up to the Buddha … and said to him:
“Sir, Pūraṇa Kassapa says this:
‘There is no cause or reason for the corruption of [[sentient being]]s.
Sentient beings are corrupted without cause or reason.
There’s no cause or reason for the purification of [[sentient being]]s.
Sentient beings are purified without cause or reason.’
What does the Buddha say about this?”
“Mahāli, there is a cause and reason for the corruption of [[sentient being]]s.
Sentient beings are corrupted with cause and reason.
There is a cause and reason for the purification of [[sentient being]]s.
Sentient beings are purified with cause and reason.”
“But sir, what is the cause and reason for the corruption of [[sentient being]]s?
How are [[sentient being]]s corrupted with cause and reason?”
“Mahāli, if form were exclusively painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—[[sentient being]]s wouldn’t be aroused by it.
But because form is pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—[[sentient being]]s are aroused by it.
Since they are aroused by it, they’re caught up in it, and so they become corrupted.
This is a cause and reason for the corruption of [[sentient being]]s.
This is how [[sentient being]]s are corrupted with cause and reason.
If feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]] were exclusively painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—[[sentient being]]s wouldn’t be aroused by it.
But because [[consciousness]] is pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—[[sentient being]]s are aroused by it.
Since they are aroused by it, they’re caught up in it, and so they become corrupted.
This is a cause and reason for the corruption of [[sentient being]]s.
This is how [[sentient being]]s are corrupted with cause and reason.”
“But sir, what is the cause and reason for the purification of [[sentient being]]s?
How are [[sentient being]]s purified with cause and reason?”
“Mahāli, if form were exclusively pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—[[sentient being]]s wouldn’t grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
But because form is painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—[[sentient being]]s do grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
Being [[disillusion]]ed, [[desire]] fades away. When [[desire]] fades away they are purified.
This is a cause and reason for the purification of [[sentient being]]s.
This is how [[sentient being]]s are purified with cause and reason.
If feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]] were exclusively pleasurable—soaked and steeped in pleasure and not steeped in pain—[[sentient being]]s wouldn’t grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
But because [[consciousness]] is painful—soaked and steeped in pain and not steeped in pleasure—[[sentient being]]s do grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
Being [[disillusion]]ed, [[desire]] fades away. When [[desire]] fades away they are purified.
This is a cause and reason for the purification of [[sentient being]]s.
This is how [[sentient being]]s are purified with cause and reason.”
