At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Eastern Monastery, the stilt longhouse of Migāra’s mother, together with a large Saṅgha of [[mendicant]]s.
Now, at that time it was the sabbath—the full moon on the fifteenth day—and the Buddha was sitting in the open surrounded by the Saṅgha of [[monk]]s.
Then one of the [[mendicant]]s got up from their seat, arranged their robe over one shoulder, raised their joined palms toward the Buddha, and said:
“Sir, I’d like to ask the Buddha about a certain point, if you’d take the time to answer.”
“Well then, [[mendicant]], take your own seat and ask what you wish.”
“Yes, sir,” replied that [[mendicant]]. He took his seat and said to the Buddha:
“Sir, are these the five grasping [[aggregates]], that is:
form, feeling, perception, choices, and [[consciousness]]?”
“Yes, they are,” replied the Buddha.
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question:
“But sir, what is the root of these five grasping [[aggregates]]?”
“These five grasping [[aggregates]] are rooted in [[desire]].” …
“But sir, is that grasping the exact same thing as the five grasping [[aggregates]]? Or is grasping one thing and the five grasping [[aggregates]] another?”
“Neither. Rather, the [[desire]] and greed for them is the grasping there.”
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] asked another question:
“But sir, can there be different kinds of [[desire]] and greed for the five grasping [[aggregates]]?”
“There can,” said the Buddha.
“It’s when someone thinks:
‘In the future, may I be of such form, such feeling, such perception, such choices, or such [[consciousness]]!’
That’s how there can be different kinds of [[desire]] and greed for the five grasping [[aggregates]].”
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] asked another question:
“Sir, what is the scope of the term ‘[[aggregates]]’ as applied to the [[aggregates]]?”
“Any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of form.
Any kind of feeling at all …
Any kind of perception at all …
Any kind of choices at all …
Any kind of [[consciousness]] at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: this is called the aggregate of [[consciousness]].
That’s the scope of the term ‘[[aggregates]]’ as applied to the [[aggregates]].”
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] asked another question:
“What is the cause, sir, what is the reason why the aggregate of form is found?
What is the cause, what is the reason why the aggregate of feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]] is found?”
“The four primary elements are the reason why the aggregate of form is found.
Contact is the reason why the [[aggregates]] of feeling,
perception,
and choices are found.
Name and form are the reasons why the aggregate of [[consciousness]] is found.”
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] asked another question:
“Sir, how does identity view come about?”
“It’s when an unlearned ordinary person has not seen the noble ones, and is neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve not seen good persons, and are neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the good persons.
They regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.
They regard feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]] as self, self as having [[consciousness]], [[consciousness]] in self, or self in [[consciousness]].
That’s how identity view comes about.”
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] … asked another question:
“But sir, how does identity view not come about?”
“It’s when a learned noble disciple has seen the noble ones, and is skilled and trained in the teaching of the noble ones. They’ve seen good persons, and are skilled and trained in the teaching of the good persons.
They don’t regard form as self, self as having form, form in self, or self in form.
They don’t regard feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]] as self, self as having [[consciousness]], [[consciousness]] in self, or self in [[consciousness]].
That’s how identity view does not come about.”
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] … asked another question:
“Sir, what’s the gratification, the drawback, and the escape when it comes to form,
feeling,
perception,
choices,
and [[consciousness]]?”
“The pleasure and happiness that arise from form: this is its gratification.
That form is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.
Removing and giving up [[desire]] and greed for form: this is its escape.
The pleasure and happiness that arise from feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]]: this is its gratification.
That [[consciousness]] is impermanent, suffering, and perishable: this is its drawback.
Removing and giving up [[desire]] and greed for [[consciousness]]: this is its escape.”
Saying “Good, sir”, that [[mendicant]] approved and agreed with what the Buddha said. Then he asked another question:
“Sir, how does one know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to [[conceit]] for this conscious [[body]] and all external stimuli?”
“One truly sees any kind of form at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near: <em>all</em> form—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’
They truly see any kind of feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]] at all—past, future, or present; internal or external; coarse or fine; inferior or superior; far or near, <em>all</em> [[consciousness]]—with right understanding: ‘This is not mine, I am not this, this is not my self.’
That’s how to know and see so that there’s no ego, possessiveness, or underlying tendency to [[conceit]] for this conscious [[body]] and all external stimuli.”
Now at that time one of the [[mendicant]]s had the thought:
“So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and [[consciousness]] are not-self.
Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?”
Then the Buddha, knowing what that [[monk]] was thinking, addressed the [[mendicant]]s:
“It’s possible that some foolish person here—unknowing and ignorant, their mind dominated by [[craving]]—thinks they can overstep the teacher’s instructions. They think:
‘So it seems, good sir, that form, feeling, perception, choices, and [[consciousness]] are not-self.
Then what self will the deeds done by not-self affect?’
Now, [[mendicant]]s, you have been educated by me in questioning with regards to all these things in all such cases.
What do you think, [[mendicant]]s?
Is form permanent or impermanent?”
“Impermanent, sir.”
“Is feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]] permanent or impermanent?”
“Impermanent, sir.”
“But if it’s impermanent, is it suffering or happiness?”
“Suffering, sir.”
“But if it’s impermanent, suffering, and perishable, is it fit to be regarded thus:
‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self’?”
“No, sir.”
“So you should truly see …
Seeing this …
They understand: ‘… there is no return to any state of existence.’”
“Two on the [[aggregates]]; exactly the same; <j>and can there be;
on the term; and on the cause;
two questions on identity;
gratification; and that with [[consciousness]]:
these are the ten questions
the [[mendicant]] came to ask.”
