At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, if there were no gratification in form, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t be aroused by it.
But since there is gratification in form, [[sentient being]]s are aroused by it.
If form had no drawback, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
But since form has a drawback, [[sentient being]]s do grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
If there were no escape from form, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t escape from it.
But since there is an escape from form, [[sentient being]]s do escape from it.
If there were no gratification in feeling …
perception …
choices …
[[consciousness]], [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t be aroused by it.
But since there is gratification in [[consciousness]], [[sentient being]]s are aroused by it.
If [[consciousness]] had no drawback, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
But since [[consciousness]] has a drawback, [[sentient being]]s do grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
If there were no escape from [[consciousness]], [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t escape from it.
But since there is an escape from [[consciousness]], [[sentient being]]s do escape from it.
As long as [[sentient being]]s don’t truly understand these five grasping [[aggregates]]’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven’t escaped from this world—with its [[gods]], Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and [[brahmin]]s, its [[gods]] and humans—and they don’t live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits.
But when [[sentient being]]s truly understand these five grasping [[aggregates]]’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they’ve escaped from this world—with its [[gods]], Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and [[brahmin]]s, its [[gods]] and humans—and they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits.”
