So I have heard.
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.
There the Buddha addressed the [[mendicant]]s,
“Mendicants!”
“Venerable sir,” they replied.
The Buddha said this:
“Once upon a time, [[mendicant]]s, the demons marched against the [[gods]].
Then Sakka, lord of [[gods]], addressed the [[gods]] Suvīra,
‘Dear Suvīra, the demons march against the [[gods]]!
Go, and march against the demons!’
‘Yes, lord,’ replied Suvīra. But he fell into negligence.
For a second time Sakka addressed Suvīra,
‘Dear Suvīra, the demons march against the [[gods]]!
Go, and march against the demons!’
‘Yes, lord,’ replied Suvīra. But for a second time he fell into negligence.
For a third time Sakka addressed Suvīra,
‘Dear Suvīra, the demons march against the [[gods]]!
Go, and march against the demons!’
‘Yes, lord,’ replied Suvīra. But for a third time he fell into negligence.
Then Sakka addressed the [[gods]] Suvīra in verse:
‘Suvīra, go to that place
where you can achieve happiness
without working for it or trying hard—
and take me with you!’
‘That a lazy man who does no work,
and doesn’t do his duty,
should fulfill all his [[desire]]s:
Sakka, grant me this boon!’
‘Suvīra, go to that place
where a lazy man who does no work
prospers in unending happiness—
and take me with you!’
‘O Sakka, first among [[gods]],
that we might find the happiness
that’s sorrowless, unstressed:
Sakka, grant me this boon!’
‘If there exists anywhere a place
where one can live happily without working,
that surely would be extinguishment’s path!
Go there, Suvīra,
and take me with you!’
So, [[mendicant]]s, even Sakka, lord of [[gods]]—while living off of the fruit of his good and bad deeds, and ruling as sovereign lord over these [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three—will speak in praise of initiative and energy.
But since you have gone forth in such a well explained teaching and training, it would be truly beautiful for you to try hard, strive, and make an effort to attain the unattained, achieve the unachieved, and realize the unrealized!”
