At one time the Buddha was staying near Rājagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the squirrels’ feeding ground.
There the Buddha addressed the [[mendicant]]s,
“Mendicants!”
“Venerable sir,” they replied.
The Buddha said this:
“Once upon a time, [[mendicant]]s, there was a poor person, destitute and pitiful.
They took up faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.
After undertaking these things, when their [[body]] broke up, after [[death]], they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three.
There they outshone the other [[gods]] in [[beauty]] and glory.
But the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three complained, grumbled, and objected,
‘Oh, how incredible, how amazing!
For when this [[gods]] was a human being in their past life they were poor, destitute, and pitiful.
And when their [[body]] broke up, after [[death]], they were reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three.
Here they outshine the other [[gods]] in [[beauty]] and glory.’
Then Sakka, lord of [[gods]], addressed the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three,
‘Good sirs, don’t complain about this [[gods]].
When this [[gods]] was a human being in their past life they took up faith, ethics, learning, generosity, and wisdom in the teaching and training proclaimed by the Realized One.
After undertaking these things, when their [[body]] broke up, after [[death]], they’ve been reborn in a good place, a heavenly realm, in the company of the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three.
Here they outshine the other [[gods]] in [[beauty]] and glory.’
Then Sakka, lord of [[gods]], guiding the [[gods]] of the Thirty-Three, recited this verse:
‘Whoever has faith in the Realized One,
unwavering and well grounded;
whose ethical [[conduct]] is good,
praised and loved by the noble ones;
who has [[confidence]] in the Saṅgha,
and correct view:
they’re said to be prosperous,
their life is not in vain.
So let the wise devote themselves
to faith, ethical behaviour,
[[confidence]], and insight into the teaching,
remembering the instructions of the Buddhas.’”
