At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, when it comes to this [[body]] made up of the four primary elements, an unlearned ordinary person might become [[disillusion]]ed, [[dispassion]]ate, and freed.
Why is that?
This [[body]] made up of the four primary elements is seen to accumulate and disperse, to be taken up and laid to rest.
That’s why, when it comes to this [[body]], an unlearned ordinary person might become [[disillusion]]ed, [[dispassion]]ate, and freed.
But when it comes to that which is called ‘mind’ or ‘sentience’ or ‘[[consciousness]]’, an unlearned ordinary person is unable to become [[disillusion]]ed, [[dispassion]]ate, or freed.
Why is that?
Because for a long time they’ve been attached to it, thought of it as their own, and mistaken it:
‘This is mine, I am this, this is my self.’
That’s why, when it comes to this mind, an unlearned ordinary person is unable to become [[disillusion]]ed, [[dispassion]]ate, and freed.
But an unlearned ordinary person would be better off taking this [[body]] made up of the four primary elements to be their self, rather than the mind.
Why is that?
This [[body]] made up of the four primary elements is seen to last for a year, or for two, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or a hundred years, or even longer.
But that which is called ‘mind’ or ‘sentience’ or ‘[[consciousness]]’ arises as one thing and ceases as another all day and all night.
In this case, a learned noble disciple carefully and rationally applies the mind to [[dependent origination]] itself:
‘When this exists, that is; due to the arising of this, that arises.
When this doesn’t exist, that is not; due to the [[cessation]] of this, that ceases. That is:
Pleasant feeling arises dependent on a [[contact]] to be experienced as pleasant.
With the [[cessation]] of that [[contact]] to be experienced as pleasant, the corresponding pleasant feeling ceases and stops.
Painful feeling arises dependent on a [[contact]] to be experienced as painful.
With the [[cessation]] of that [[contact]] to be experienced as painful, the corresponding painful feeling ceases and stops.
Neutral feeling arises dependent on a [[contact]] to be experienced as neutral.
With the [[cessation]] of that [[contact]] to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.
When you rub two sticks together, heat is generated and fire is produced. But when you part the sticks and lay them aside, any corresponding heat ceases and stops.
In the same way, pleasant feeling arises dependent on a [[contact]] to be experienced as pleasant.
With the [[cessation]] of that [[contact]] to be experienced as pleasant, the corresponding pleasant feeling ceases and stops.
Painful feeling …
Neutral feeling arises dependent on a [[contact]] to be experienced as neutral.
With the [[cessation]] of that [[contact]] to be experienced as neutral, the corresponding neutral feeling ceases and stops.
Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows [[disillusion]]ed with form, feeling, perception, choices, and [[consciousness]].
Being [[disillusion]]ed, [[desire]] fades away. When [[desire]] fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.
They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”
