At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, [[diversity]] of elements gives rise to [[diversity]] of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to [[diversity]] of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to [[diversity]] of [[contact]]s. Diversity of [[contact]]s gives rise to [[diversity]] of feelings. Diversity of feelings gives rise to [[diversity]] of [[desire]]s. Diversity of [[desire]]s gives rise to [[diversity]] of passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to [[diversity]] of searches. Diversity of searches gives rise to [[diversity]] of gains.
And what is the [[diversity]] of elements?
The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the thought element.
This is called the [[diversity]] of elements.
And how does [[diversity]] of elements give rise to [[diversity]] of perceptions … [[diversity]] of searches give rise to [[diversity]] of gains?
The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights. The perception of sights gives rise to thoughts about sights. Thoughts about sights give rise to sight [[contact]]. Sight [[contact]] gives rise to feeling born of sight [[contact]]. Feeling born of sight [[contact]] gives rise to the [[desire]] for sights. The [[desire]] for sights gives rise to the passion for sights. The passion for sights gives rise to searching for sights. Searching for sights gives rise to gaining sights …
The thought element gives rise to the perception of thoughts. The perception of thoughts gives rise to thoughts about thoughts. Thoughts about thoughts give rise to thought [[contact]]. Thought [[contact]] gives rise to feeling born of thought [[contact]]. Feeling born of thought [[contact]] gives rise to the [[desire]] for thoughts. The [[desire]] for thoughts gives rise to the passion for thoughts. The passion for thoughts gives rise to searching for thoughts. Searching for thoughts gives rise to gaining thoughts.
That’s how [[diversity]] of elements gives rise to [[diversity]] of perceptions … [[diversity]] of searches gives rise to [[diversity]] of gains.”
