Near Rājagaha, in the squirrels’ feeding ground.
Then Venerable Mahākassapa went up to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:
“Kassapa, advise the [[mendicant]]s!
Give them a Dhamma talk!
Either you or I should advise the [[mendicant]]s
and give them a Dhamma talk.”
“Sir, the [[mendicant]]s these days are hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They’re impatient, and don’t take instruction respectfully.”
“Kassapa, that’s because formerly the senior [[mendicant]]s lived in the wilderness, ate only [[almsfood]], wore rag robes, and owned just three robes; and they praised these things. They were of few wishes, [[content]], secluded, aloof, and energetic; and they praised these things.
The senior [[mendicant]]s invite such a [[mendicant]] to a seat, saying:
‘Welcome, [[mendicant]]! What is this [[mendicant]]’s name? This [[mendicant]] is good-natured; he really wants to train. Please, [[mendicant]], take a seat.’
Then the junior [[mendicant]]s think:
‘It seems that when a [[mendicant]] lives in the wilderness … and is energetic, and praises these things, senior [[mendicant]]s invite them to a seat …’
They practice accordingly.
That is for their lasting welfare and happiness.
But these days, Kassapa, the senior [[mendicant]]s don’t live in the wilderness … and aren’t energetic; and they don’t praise these things.
When a [[mendicant]] is well-known and famous, a recipient of robes, [[almsfood]], lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, senior [[mendicant]]s invite them to a seat:
‘Welcome, [[mendicant]]! What is this [[mendicant]]’s name? This [[mendicant]] is good-natured; he really likes his fellow [[monk]]s. Please, [[mendicant]], take a seat.’
Then the junior [[mendicant]]s think:
‘It seems that when a [[mendicant]] is well-known and famous, a recipient of robes, [[almsfood]], lodgings, and medicines and supplies for the sick, senior [[mendicant]]s invite them to a seat …’
They practice accordingly.
That is for their lasting harm and suffering.
And if it could ever be rightly said that
spiritual practitioners are imperiled by the peril of a spiritual practitioner, and vanquished by the vanquishing of a spiritual practitioner, it is these days that this could be rightly said.”
