At Sāvatthī.
Now at that time a certain junior [[monk]], after his meal, on his return from almsround, entered his dwelling, where he adhered to passivity and silence. And he didn’t help the [[mendicant]]s out when it was time to sew robes.
Then several [[mendicant]]s went up to the Buddha, bowed, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened.
So the Buddha addressed a certain [[monk]],
“Please, [[monk]], in my name tell that [[monk]] that the Teacher summons him.”
“Yes, sir,” that [[monk]] replied. He went to that [[monk]] and said to him,
“Reverend, the teacher summons you.”
“Yes, reverend,” that [[monk]] replied. He went to the Buddha, bowed, and sat down to one side. The Buddha said to him:
“Is it really true, [[monk]], that after your meal, on your return from almsround, you entered your dwelling, where you adhered to passivity and silence, and you didn’t help the [[mendicant]]s out when it was time to sew robes?”
“Sir, I am doing my own work.”
Then the Buddha, knowing what that [[monk]] was thinking, addressed the [[mendicant]]s:
“Mendicants, don’t complain about this [[monk]].
This [[monk]] gets the four absorptions—[[bliss]]ful meditations in the present life that belong to the higher mind—when he wants, without trouble or difficulty. He has realized the supreme culmination of the spiritual path in this very life, and lives having achieved with his own insight the goal for which gentlemen rightly go forth from the lay life to homelessness.”
That is what the Buddha said.
Then the Holy One, the Teacher, went on to say:
“Not by being slack,
or with little strength
is extinguishment realized,
the freedom from all suffering.
This young [[monk]],
this best of men,
bears his final [[body]],
having vanquished Māra and his mount.”
