So I have heard.
At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s monastery.
There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the [[mendicant]]s:
“Reverends, [[mendicant]]s!”
“Reverend,” they replied.
Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this:
“Just now, reverends, as I was in private retreat this thought came to mind:
‘They speak of this thing called “noble silence”.
What then is this noble silence?’
It occurred to me:
‘As the placing of the mind and keeping it connected are stilled, a [[mendicant]] enters and remains in the second absorption, which has the rapture and [[bliss]] born of [[immersion]], with internal clarity and mind at one, without [[placing the mind]] and keeping it connected.
This is called noble silence.’
And so, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I was entering and remaining in the second absorption, which has the rapture and [[bliss]] born of [[immersion]], with internal clarity and mind at one, without [[placing the mind]] and keeping it connected.
While I was in that meditation, perceptions accompanied by [[placing the mind]] beset me due to loss of focus.
Then the Buddha came up to me with his psychic power and said,
‘Moggallāna, Moggallāna! Don’t neglect noble silence, [[brahmin]]! Settle your mind in noble silence; unify your mind and bring it to [[immersion]] in noble silence.’
And so, after some time, as the placing of the mind and keeping it connected were stilled, I entered and remained in the second absorption …
So if anyone should be rightly called
a disciple who attained to great [[direct knowledge]] with help from the Teacher, it’s me.”
