“Mendicants, I will teach you the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all [[conceive]]ing.
Listen …
And what is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all [[conceive]]ing?
It’s when a [[mendicant]] does not [[conceive]]e anything to be the eye, does not [[conceive]]e it in the eye, does not [[conceive]]e it as the eye, and does not [[conceive]]e that ‘the eye is mine.’
They don’t [[conceive]]e anything to be sights …
eye [[consciousness]] … eye [[contact]]. And they don’t [[conceive]]e anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye [[contact]]. They don’t [[conceive]]e it in that, they don’t [[conceive]]e it as that, and they don’t [[conceive]]e that ‘that is mine.’
For whatever you [[conceive]]e it to be, whatever you [[conceive]]e it in, whatever you [[conceive]]e it as, and whatever you [[conceive]]e to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.
The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.
They don’t [[conceive]]e anything to be the ear … nose … tongue …
[[body]] …
mind …
They don’t [[conceive]]e anything to be the pleasant, painful, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind [[contact]]. They don’t [[conceive]]e it in that, they don’t [[conceive]]e it as that, and they don’t [[conceive]]e that ‘that is mine.’
For whatever you [[conceive]]e it to be, whatever you [[conceive]]e it in, whatever you [[conceive]]e it as, and whatever you [[conceive]]e to be ‘mine’: that becomes something else.
The world is attached to being, taking pleasure only in being, yet it becomes something else.
As far as the [[aggregates]], elements, and sense fields extend, they don’t [[conceive]]e anything to be that, they don’t [[conceive]]e it in that, they don’t [[conceive]]e it as that, and they don’t [[conceive]]e that ‘that is mine.’
Not [[conceive]]ing, they don’t grasp at anything in the world.
Not grasping, they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.
They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’
This is the practice that’s conducive to uprooting all [[conceive]]ing.”
