At one time the Buddha was staying near Gayā on Gayā Head together with a thousand [[mendicant]]s.
There the Buddha addressed the [[mendicant]]s:
“Mendicants, all is burning.
And what is the all that is burning?
The eye is burning. Sights are burning. Eye [[consciousness]] is burning. Eye [[contact]] is burning. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye [[contact]] is also burning.
Burning with what?
Burning with the fires of greed, hate, and [[delusion]]. Burning with [[rebirth]], [[old age]], and [[death]], with sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress.
The ear … nose … tongue … [[body]] …
The mind is burning. Thoughts are burning. Mind [[consciousness]] is burning. Mind [[contact]] is burning. The painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind [[contact]] is also burning.
Burning with what?
Burning with the fires of greed, hate, and [[delusion]]. Burning with [[rebirth]], [[old age]], and [[death]], with sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress, I say.
Seeing this, a learned noble disciple grows [[disillusion]]ed with the eye, sights, eye [[consciousness]], and eye [[contact]]. And they grow [[disillusion]]ed with the painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by eye [[contact]].
They grow [[disillusion]]ed with the ear … nose … tongue … [[body]] … mind … painful, pleasant, or neutral feeling that arises conditioned by mind [[contact]].
Being [[disillusion]]ed, [[desire]] fades away. When [[desire]] fades away they’re freed. When they’re freed, they know they’re freed.
They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”
That is what the Buddha said.
Satisfied, the [[mendicant]]s approved what the Buddha said.
And while this discourse was being spoken, the minds of the thousand [[mendicant]]s were freed from [[defilement]]s by not grasping.
