At one time the Buddha was staying in the land of the Vajjis near Ukkacelā on the bank of the Ganges river, together with a large Saṅgha of [[mendicant]]s. It was not long after Sāriputta and Moggallāna had become fully extinguished.
Now, at that time the Buddha was sitting in the open, surrounded by the Saṅgha of [[mendicant]]s.
Then the Buddha looked around the Saṅgha of [[mendicant]]s, who were silent. He addressed them:
“Mendicants, this [[assembly]] seems empty to me now that Sāriputta and Moggallāna have become fully extinguished.
When Sāriputta and Moggallāna were alive, my [[assembly]] was never empty; I had no concern for any region where they stayed.
The Buddhas of the past or the future have pairs of chief disciples who are no better than
Sāriputta and Moggallāna were to me.
It’s an incredible and amazing quality of such disciples
that they fulfill the Teacher’s instructions and follow his advice. And they’re liked and approved, respected and admired by the four [[assembly]].
And it’s an incredible and amazing quality of the Realized One
that when such a pair of disciples becomes fully extinguished he does not sorrow or lament.
How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out?
That is not possible.
Suppose there was a large tree standing with heartwood, and the largest branches fell off.
In the same way, in the great Saṅgha that stands with heartwood, Sāriputta and Moggallāna have become fully extinguished.
How could it possibly be so that what is born, created, conditioned, and liable to wear out should not wear out?
That is not possible.
So [[mendicant]]s, live as your own island, your own refuge, with no other refuge. Let the teaching be your island and your refuge, with no other refuge.
And how does a [[mendicant]] do this?
It’s when a [[mendicant]] meditates by observing an aspect of the [[body]]—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of [[covetous]]ness and displeasure for the world.
They meditate observing an aspect of feelings …
mind …
principles—keen, aware, and mindful, rid of [[covetous]]ness and displeasure for the world.
That’s how a [[mendicant]] lives as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge. That’s how the teaching is their island and their refuge, with no other refuge.
Whether now or after I have passed, any who shall live as their own island, their own refuge, with no other refuge; with the teaching as their island and their refuge, with no other refuge—those [[mendicant]]s of mine who want to train shall be among the best of the best.”
