“Mendicants, an ethical person, who has fulfilled ethical [[conduct]], need not make a wish:
‘May I have no regrets!’
It’s only natural that an ethical person has no regrets.
When you have no regrets you need not make a wish:
‘May I feel joy!’
It’s only natural that joy springs up when you have no regrets.
When you feel joy you need not make a wish:
‘May I experience rapture!’
It’s only natural that rapture arises when you’re joyful.
When your mind is full of rapture you need not make a wish:
‘May my [[body]] become tranquil!’
It’s only natural that your [[body]] becomes tranquil when your mind is full of rapture.
When your [[body]] is tranquil you need not make a wish:
‘May I feel [[bliss]]!’
It’s only natural to feel [[bliss]] when your [[body]] is tranquil.
When you feel [[bliss]] you need not make a wish:
‘May my mind be immersed in [[immersion]]!’
It’s only natural for the mind to become immersed in [[immersion]] when you feel [[bliss]].
When your mind is immersed in [[immersion]] you need not make a wish:
‘May I truly know and see!’
It’s only natural to truly know and see when your mind is immersed in [[immersion]].
When you truly know and see you need not make a wish:
‘May I grow [[disillusion]]ed!’
It’s only natural to grow [[disillusion]]ed when you truly know and see.
When you’re [[disillusion]]ed you need not make a wish:
‘May I become [[dispassion]]ate!’
It’s only natural to grow [[dispassion]]ate when you’re [[disillusion]]ed.
When you’re [[dispassion]]ate you need not make a wish:
‘May I realize the knowledge and vision of freedom!’
It’s only natural to realize the knowledge and vision of freedom when you’re [[dispassion]]ate.
And so, [[mendicant]]s, the knowledge and vision of freedom is the purpose and benefit of [[dispassion]]. Dispassion is the purpose and benefit of [[disillusion]]ment. Disillusionment is the purpose and benefit of truly knowing and seeing. Truly knowing and seeing is the purpose and benefit of [[immersion]]. Immersion is the purpose and benefit of [[bliss]]. Bliss is the purpose and benefit of tranquility. Tranquility is the purpose and benefit of rapture. Rapture is the purpose and benefit of joy. Joy is the purpose and benefit of not having regrets. Not having regrets is the purpose and benefit of skillful ethics.
And so, [[mendicant]]s, good qualities flow on and fill up from one to the other, for going from the near shore to the far shore.”
