So I have heard.
At one time Venerable Mahāmoggallāna was staying in the land of the Bhaggas on Crocodile Hill, in the deer park at Bhesakaḷā’s Wood.
There Venerable Mahāmoggallāna addressed the [[mendicant]]s:
“Reverends, [[mendicant]]s!”
“Reverend,” they replied.
Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said this:
“Suppose a [[mendicant]] invites
other [[mendicant]]s to admonish them. But they’re hard to admonish, having qualities that make them hard to admonish. They're impatient, and don't take instruction respectfully. So their spiritual companions don’t think it’s worth advising and instructing them, and that person doesn’t gain their trust.
And what are the qualities that make them hard to admonish?
Firstly, a [[mendicant]] has wicked [[desire]]s, having fallen under the sway of wicked [[desire]]s.
This is a quality that makes them difficult to admonish.
Furthermore, a [[mendicant]] glorifies themselves and puts others down. …
They’re irritable, overcome by [[anger]] …
They’re irritable, and hostile due to [[anger]] …
They’re irritable, and stubborn due to [[anger]] …
They’re irritable, and blurt out words bordering on [[anger]] …
When accused, they object to the accuser …
When accused, they rebuke the accuser …
When accused, they retort to the accuser …
When accused, they dodge the issue, distract the discussion with irrelevant points, and display annoyance, hate, and bitterness …
When accused, they are unable to account for their behavior …
They are offensive and [[contempt]]uous …
They’re jealous and stingy …
They’re devious and [[deceit]]ful …
They’re obstinate and vain …
Furthermore, a [[mendicant]] is attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go.
This too is a quality that makes them difficult to admonish.
These are the qualities that make them hard to admonish.
Suppose a [[mendicant]] doesn’t invite
other [[mendicant]]s to admonish them. But they’re easy to admonish, having qualities that make them easy to admonish. They're accepting, and take instruction respectfully. So their spiritual companions think it’s worth advising and instructing them, and that person gains their trust.
And what are the qualities that make them easy to admonish?
Firstly, a [[mendicant]] doesn’t have wicked [[desire]]s …
Furthermore, a [[mendicant]] isn’t attached to their own views, not holding them tight, but letting them go easily.
These are the qualities that make them easy to admonish.
In such a case, a [[mendicant]] should measure themselves against another like this.
‘This person has wicked [[desire]]s, having fallen under the sway of wicked [[desire]]s. And I don’t like or approve of this person.
And if I were to fall under the sway of wicked [[desire]]s, others wouldn’t like or approve of me.’
A [[mendicant]] who knows this should give rise to the thought: ‘I will not fall under the sway of wicked [[desire]]s.’ …
‘This person is attached to their own views, holding them tight and refusing to let go. And I don’t like or approve of this person.
And if I were to be attached to my own views, holding them tight and refusing to let go, others wouldn’t like or approve of me.’
A [[mendicant]] who knows this should give rise to the thought: ‘I will not be attached to my own views, holding them tight, but will let them go easily.’
In such a case, a [[mendicant]] should check themselves like this:
‘Do I have wicked [[desire]]s? Have I fallen under the sway of wicked [[desire]]s?’
Suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] knows that
they have fallen under the sway of wicked [[desire]]s. Then they should make an effort to give up those bad, unskillful qualities.
But suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] knows that
they haven’t fallen under the sway of wicked [[desire]]s. Then they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities. …
Suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] knows that
they are attached to their own views, holding them tight, and refusing to let go. Then they should make an effort to give up those bad, unskillful qualities.
Suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] knows that
they’re not attached to their own views, holding them tight, but let them go easily. Then they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.
Suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] sees that they haven’t given up all these bad, unskillful qualities. Then they should make an effort to give them all up.
But suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] sees that they have given up all these bad, unskillful qualities. Then they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.
Suppose there was a woman or man who was young, youthful, and fond of adornments, and they check their own reflection in a clean bright mirror or a clear bowl of water. If they see any dirt or [[blemish]] there, they’d try to remove it.
But if they don’t see any dirt or [[blemish]] there, they’re happy, thinking:
‘How fortunate that I’m clean!’
In the same way, suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] sees that they haven’t given up all these bad, unskillful qualities. Then they should make an effort to give them all up.
But suppose that, upon checking, a [[mendicant]] sees that they have given up all these bad, unskillful qualities. Then they should meditate with rapture and joy, training day and night in skillful qualities.”
This is what Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said.
Satisfied, the [[mendicant]]s were happy with what Venerable Mahāmoggallāna said.
