At one time the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī.
Then the Buddha said to Venerable Sāriputta,
“Sāriputta, this was said in ‘The Way to the Beyond’, in ‘The Questions of Ajita’:
‘There are those who have assessed the teaching,
and many kinds of [[trainee]]s here.
Tell me about their behavior, good sir,
when asked, for you are alert.’
How should we see the detailed meaning of this brief statement?”
When he said this, Sāriputta kept silent.
For a second time …
For a third time …
Sāriputta kept silent.
“Sāriputta, do you see that this has come to be?”
“Sir, one truly sees with right wisdom that this has come to be.
Seeing this, one is practicing for [[disillusion]]ment, [[dispassion]], and [[cessation]] regarding what has come to be.
One truly sees with right wisdom that it originated with that as fuel.
Seeing this, one is practicing for [[disillusion]]ment, [[dispassion]], and [[cessation]] regarding the fuel for its origination.
One truly sees with right wisdom that when that fuel ceases, what has come to be is liable to cease.
Seeing this, one is practicing for [[disillusion]]ment, [[dispassion]], and [[cessation]] regarding what is liable to cease.
In this way one is a [[trainee]].
And what, sir, is one who has assessed the teaching?
Sir, one truly sees with right wisdom that this has come to be.
Seeing this, one is freed by not grasping through [[disillusion]]ment, [[dispassion]], and [[cessation]] regarding what has come to be.
One truly sees with right wisdom that it originated with that as fuel.
Seeing this, one is freed by not grasping through [[disillusion]]ment, [[dispassion]], and [[cessation]] regarding the fuel for its origination.
One truly sees with right wisdom that when that fuel ceases, what has come to be is liable to cease.
Seeing this, one is freed by not grasping through [[disillusion]]ment, [[dispassion]], and [[cessation]] regarding what is liable to cease.
In this way one has assessed the teaching.
Sir, regarding what was said in ‘The Way to the Beyond’, in ‘The Questions of Ajita’:
‘There are those who have assessed the teaching,
and many kinds of [[trainee]]s here.
Tell me about their behavior, good sir,
when asked, for you are alert.’
This is how I understand the detailed meaning of what was said in brief.”
“Good, good, Sāriputta!” (The Buddha repeated all of Sāriputta’s explanation, concluding:)
This is how to understand the detailed meaning of what was said in brief.”
