At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, I will teach seventy-seven grounds for knowledge.
Listen and pay close attention, I will speak.”
“Yes, sir,” they replied.
The Buddha said this:
“And what are the seventy-seven grounds for knowledge?
The knowledge that [[rebirth]] is a condition for [[old age]] and [[death]],
and the knowledge that when [[rebirth]] doesn’t exist, there is no [[old age]] and [[death]].
Also regarding the past: the knowledge that [[rebirth]] is a condition for [[old age]] and [[death]], and the knowledge that when [[rebirth]] doesn’t exist, there is no [[old age]] and [[death]].
Also regarding the future: the knowledge that [[rebirth]] is a condition for [[old age]] and [[death]], and the knowledge that when [[rebirth]] doesn’t exist, there is no [[old age]] and [[death]].
And also their knowledge that even this knowledge of the stability of natural principles is liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.
The knowledge that continued existence is a condition for [[rebirth]] …
The knowledge that ignorance is a condition for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices.
Also regarding the past: the knowledge that ignorance is a condition for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices.
Also regarding the future: the knowledge that ignorance is a condition for choices, and the knowledge that when ignorance doesn’t exist, there are no choices.
And also their knowledge that even this knowledge of the stability of natural principles is liable to end, vanish, fade away, and cease.
These are called the seventy-seven grounds for knowledge.”
