At Sāvatthī.
“Mendicants, if you’re involved, you’re not free. If you’re not involved, you’re free.
As long as [[consciousness]] remains, it would remain involved with form, supported by form, founded on form. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.
Or [[consciousness]] would remain involved with feeling …
Or [[consciousness]] would remain involved with perception …
Or as long as [[consciousness]] remains, it would remain involved with choices, supported by choices, grounded on choices. And with a sprinkle of relishing, it would grow, increase, and mature.
Mendicants, suppose you say:
‘Apart from form, feeling, perception, and choices, I will describe the coming and going of [[consciousness]], its passing away and reappearing, its growth, increase, and maturity.’ That is not possible.
If a [[mendicant]] has given up greed for the form element,
the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for [[consciousness]].
If a [[mendicant]] has given up greed for the feeling element …
perception element …
choices element …
[[consciousness]] element,
the support is cut off, and there is no foundation for [[consciousness]].
Since that [[consciousness]] does not become established and does not grow, with no power to regenerate, it is freed.
Being free, it’s stable. Being stable, it’s [[content]]. Being [[content]], they’re not anxious. Not being anxious, they personally become extinguished.
They understand: ‘Rebirth is ended, the spiritual journey has been completed, what had to be done has been done, there is no return to any state of existence.’”
