“Mendicants, if there were no gratification in the eye, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t love it.
But since there is gratification in the eye, [[sentient being]]s do love it.
If the eye had no drawback, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
But since the eye has a drawback, [[sentient being]]s do grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
If there were no escape from the eye, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t escape from it.
But since there is an escape from the eye, [[sentient being]]s do escape from it.
If there were no gratification in the ear …
nose …
tongue …
[[body]] …
mind, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t love it.
But since there is gratification in the mind, [[sentient being]]s do love it.
If the mind had no drawback, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
But since the mind has a drawback, [[sentient being]]s do grow [[disillusion]]ed with it.
If there were no escape from the mind, [[sentient being]]s wouldn’t escape from it.
But since there is an escape from the mind, [[sentient being]]s do escape from it.
As long as [[sentient being]]s don’t truly understand these six interior sense fields’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they haven’t escaped from this world—with its [[gods]], Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and [[brahmin]]s, its [[gods]] and humans—and they don’t live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits.
But when [[sentient being]]s truly understand these six interior sense fields’ gratification, drawback, and escape for what they are, they’ve escaped from this world—with its [[gods]], Māras, and Brahmās, this population with its ascetics and [[brahmin]]s, its [[gods]] and humans—and they live detached, liberated, with a mind free of limits.”
